A warning that this episode contains
descriptions of violence and graphic
language
>> from the New York Times. I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is the daily.
>> The [__] DID YOU JUST DO?
WHAT THE [__] DID YOU JUST DO?
Outrage and protest in Minneapolis after
federal agents shoot and kill a man
today.
>> Border Patrol agents shot and killed a
man in Minneapolis on Saturday.
>> The second fatal clash between federal
authorities and protesters in less than
a month.
>> You murder.
How dare you.
>> Eyewitness video shows once again
reckless, violent, and dangerous federal
agents taking the life of a motan. If it
can happen here, it can happen in your
community, too.
>> The shooting prompted a fresh wave of
fury and condemnation across the
country.
>> How many more Americans need to die or
get badly hurt for this operation to
end?
>> And it horrified residents in a city
that has been revoling against a federal
government crackdown on immigration.
This individual who came with weapons
and ammunition to stop a law enforcement
operation of federal law enforcement
officers committed an act of domestic
terrorism. That's the facts.
>> No one who wants to be peaceful shows up
at a protest with a firearm that is
loaded with two full magazines. That is
not a peaceful protest and you do not
get to touch law enforcement.
>> Federal officials alleged that the
protester was the aggressor and that the
agents acted in self-defense.
>> Oh my god. Oh, they just saw somebody.
>> But videos of the shooting directly
contradict that claim.
Today, we talked to our colleagues Devon
Lum and [music] Ernesto Londono about
how the shooting unfolded and what may
come next. [music]
It's Monday, [music] January 26th.
Devon, welcome to the Daily.
>> Thanks for having me.
>> So Devon, by now I think a lot of people
have seen this really graphic footage of
a man named Alex Prey getting shot by
federal agents in Minnesota. The
Department of Homeland Security claims
that Prey was approaching these agents
with a handgun, that he was intent on
committing what they called, quote, a
massacre.
You are a member of our visual
investigations team, which means that
you have been spending a lot of time
analyzing footage from this shooting,
from the scene. So, what do you make of
the government's claims?
>> We've been analyzing footage from
various different angles over the past
day and a half trying to better
understand what took place before,
during, and after the shooting.
>> Mhm. You know, there's contention over
what happened between the federal
government and the state government, and
we're doing our best to resolve that
contention by walking through the visual
evidence as clearly and as in-depth as
we possibly can. And the one thing
that's blatantly clear in our analysis
that contrasts with the narrative that
the administration put out there in the
immediate aftermath of the shooting is
that Freddy was not holding a gun when
he began interacting with the federal
agents or throughout the entirety of
their interaction. Instead, he's holding
a cell phone.
>> And can you just set the scene, Devon,
at the beginning of the footage that
you've been analyzing? What do we see?
What's going on? The footage begins with
two protesters interacting with a
federal agent on a street in Minneapolis
in front of a doughnut shop. We can see
that Freddy is walking into the street
with his outstretched arm holding his
cell phone recording the interaction. He
appears to be an observer in this
moment. He's standing, you know, further
away from where that interaction is
taking place
>> and appears to be directing traffic with
his free hand. And how do things
escalate from there?
>> The agent who was interacting with the
two protesters standing in the street
begins to push the protesters in the
direction of Mr. Prey and eventually
they make their way towards where he's
standing.
So before I get into the details, I just
want to say that these next moments
happen very quickly. From the time that
things started to escalate until the
final shot is fired, just over 40
seconds elaps.
>> Wow.
Once they get there, the agent pushes
one of the protesters to the ground and
Alex Prey steps in between the agent and
the woman who has just been pushed to
the ground. The agent begins firing
pepper spray at him. In that moment, we
can see that he's still holding his cell
phone and his other hand is still free.
>> Mhm.
Then Alex Prey turns around to
apparently try to help the woman who's
been pushed to the ground up to her feet
and the agent continues firing pepper
spray at both of them.
Several agents appear behind
Mr. Prey and begin pulling him in order
to get him down to the ground. Once he's
down on the ground, several other agents
are holding him down. They're grabbing
at his legs. Mhm.
>> They're pushing him in his back and they
appear to be striking him repetitively.
>> Mhm.
>> Another agent walks towards the scrum
and reaches toward Alex Prey with open
hands. It's unclear at that moment why
he's grabbing at him, but a few seconds
later
we hear someone saying he's got a gun
over and over again. They say it
repetitively,
>> meaning that they might not have
realized that he had a gun until that
moment when he's on the ground.
>> Exactly. And again, looking back at the
footage, from any point of the
interaction up until now, there is no
visual giveaway that would indicate that
agents knew that he was armed.
>> So, what happens next? How does the
scene unfold from there once he's
restrained and on the ground?
>> The agent who reached into the scrum
with open hands, grabs a firearm from
Alex Freddy's waist. Then about 1 second
after Freddy's gun has been removed,
another agent fires the first shot.
>> So he can see the other agent taking the
gun out of the holster.
>> We're not exactly sure what he's seeing
at this point because it's a very split
second,
>> but in the video it appears he has a
clear vantage point of the disarming as
it's happening. So, at this point, just
to be clear, one agent has removed the
gun, has backed away from Alex Prey, and
that's when we hear the first shot that
was fired. Yes, the gun that was
apparently removed from Alex Py's hip is
away from the pile before the first shot
is fired. And after that first shot is
fired, Freddy appears to get up onto his
knees, and his hands, which were bunched
up near his head, move down towards his
sides.
The agent fires three more times [music]
and Freddy begins to fall to the ground.
He reaches down with his left hand while
falling, apparently to brace himself and
there is not appear to be weapons in
either of his hands.
Then the agent who initially pepper-
sprayed Freddy joins in, and the two of
them fire six more shots at Py's
disarmed body, which is at this point
laying motionless on the ground.
In total, they appear to fire 10 shots
in 5 seconds.
We can hear in later footage that as
agents are searching Alex Party's body
after he's already been shot.
>> One agent yells, "Where's the gun?
Where's the gun?" So clearly not all of
the agents know that Alex Prey had
already been disarmed. You know, given
the fact that the first shot was fired
only about a second after PR's gun was
removed,
>> even though the agent who shot Alex Prey
might have been able to see that the gun
had been unholstered, it all is
happening so fast that you can't know
for sure whether he definitely knew that
when he was firing.
>> Well, sure, it's it's difficult to know
what the agent who fired saw or knew
when he fired other than that there was
a gun present.
>> Mhm. But what we do know is that Alex
Prey was very clearly subdued on the
ground. He was being held down and his
arms were by his head.
>> And again, the agent was standing behind
Prey. He was aiming at his back. So he
presented no clear threat to the agents
at that point. But I want to stress that
the statement that is being made by the
Department of Homeland Security is that
Freddy approached an agent with a gun.
>> Right?
>> It's true. He was armed with a gun, but
the videos show he was not holding it in
his hand throughout the entire
interaction with the agents.
>> Mhm.
>> The Department of Homeland Security also
said the agent fired out of concern for
the agents safety. So, if we're looking
at the footage and we're assessing
whether or not there's a concern for
safety, we can see that Freddy is on the
ground, he's being subdued, and even if
there's a gun on his hip, at one point,
he can't reach it. So, the response to
shoot him, to pull out a firearm and and
shoot him rather than taking a beat to
understand whether another agent, one of
your colleagues, has disarmed the person
you're about to shoot.
It just doesn't comport with what the
Department of Homeland Security is
saying.
>> You know, we talked to our colleague
Charles Has on the show about a week
ago. He described at that point what
felt almost like a lull in the sense
that it had been a few days since a
federal agent had shot Renee Good.
Obviously, people had taken to the
streets were outraged, but it felt also
like ICE was operating a little bit less
visibly. And I think it was kind of an
open question at that time whether
things would escalate or would
deescalate. And it feels really notable
that here we are just a few days later
reacting to another fatal shooting. Yes,
this is the second shooting in less than
a month that's been carried out by
federal agents in Minneapolis where the
footage that we've analyzed has
conflicted with statements that have
been made by the Department of Homeland
Security about what took place. [music]
Tensions are already high online, around
the country, and on the ground in
Minneapolis, and this is sure to inflame
them [music] further.
>> [music]
>> Devon Lum, thank you so much. Thanks for
having me.
[music]
>> We'll be right back.
Ernesto. Hi.
>> Hi, Rachel.
>> I wonder Ernesto, could you just tell us
what it's been like on the ground in the
hours since Alex Prey was shot?
>> I think this is a city where people are
shell shocked. Ever since this
immigration crackdown began late last
month, there's been sort of a sense that
things are escalating in a way that
feels unsustainable.
And Saturday morning, a second
individual was killed by federal agents.
In both cases, these were American
citizens who had decided to take to the
streets to monitor and to challenge the
work of immigration agents. And in both
cases they were gunned down. And I think
people both in local government but just
residents have been trying desperately
to find an offramp from a situation they
think is really dangerous.
>> Can you talk about what we know about
Alex Prey as of now?
>> Yes, we know that he was a nurse at the
VA locally. We are told that he cared
deeply for his patients and that he was
a beloved member of his community. We
know that he carried a weapon and that
he was allowed to be a gun owner and
that he was armed when this occurred. We
know he had no criminal record and you
know he was a federal employee. So, I
don't think we've seen any evidence to
suggest that he was a violent person,
but we're only, you know, about 24 hours
into this. So, I think there's a lot we
will learn in the hours and days ahead.
>> What do we know about what Border Patrol
was doing at the scene at that moment?
Do we know anything about who they were
trying to apprehend, for instance?
So what we heard is that the border
patrol agents were trying to find a
specific guy, an immigrant from Ecuador,
that they portrayed as somebody with a
very significant criminal history,
somebody who was violent.
And what the Trump administration is
saying is any effort of people impeding
the work of these agents is
unconscionable because they're just here
to impose order and to keep people and
neighborhoods safe. However, just hours
after the shooting, you had the
Minnesota Department of Corrections,
which runs the prison system, come out
and say, "Hey, we looked into this
matter. We looked into court records. We
can't find evidence that this individual
has anything beyond some misdemeanor
traffic citations.
So, you know, essentially the state is
pouring cold water on the genesis of the
operation that led to this killing. If
the shooting had been done by local
authorities, you could imagine and
predict sort of what would happen next
just in terms of an investigation into
the use of force. The shooting obviously
happened by a border patrol agent. So I
wonder how would it normally work in the
aftermath of this kind of a thing. What
would you normally expect and what do we
know about what is happening now? So the
way this has been handled in the past,
for instance, when there was a US
marshal who used deadly force here a few
years ago is the federal government, the
department of justice and its office of
civil rights partners quickly with the
state agency that has the most expertise
in use of force cases. And they collect
and review evidence jointly trying to
make sense of whether the officer when
he or she used deadly force had a
credible fear that that was the only
means to remain safe in the face of a
dire threat to the agent or to others
around them.
>> These videos that have emerged to date,
you know, while really providing us
considerable amount of insight into what
happened in that moment are only part of
the story. And usually when this kind of
investigation is conducted, you try to
get more video of what was happening,
you know, minutes before this, you try
to get witness accounts of what was
being said, you know, as part of this
exchange. So typically, it takes weeks,
if not months, for investigators to
assemble a complete and conclusive
picture that allows them to decide
whether or not a prosecution is
warranted. Mhm.
>> What you saw in the immediate aftermath
of the initial shooting early this
month, the shooting of Renee Good is
that top officials in the Trump
administration said that the state
agency was being cut off of the
investigation. This was highly anomalous
for these kind of shootings and it
immediately created a concern among
local officials that there was going to
be a cover up, that we weren't going to
get a proper and thorough investigation.
>> Mhm. So what the local prosecutor in
Henipin County, which includes
Minneapolis, did was in the absence of
sort of the ability of gathering
firthand evidence, forensic evidence and
witness testimony from the kind of
people that would normally be involved
in this kind of an investigation. She
created an online portal and asked
people out in the community to submit
videos and any other evidence that might
help her office establish whether or not
a crime occurred and whether or not
there's enough evidence to bring charges
against the agents.
>> That sounds extremely unusual.
>> To call this unusual would be the
understatement of the decade. And fast
forward a couple of weeks when we have
this second fatal shooting on Saturday.
At the outset, local and state officials
who ran to the scene to try to preserve
and examine evidence were physically
blocked from getting there. And as of
this moment, they don't even know the
identity of the federal agents who
opened fire. So something as basic as
knowing who it is you're investigating
is going to make any prosecution or any
investigation that people regard as
credible and satisfying really really
hard.
>> And in the meantime, of course, you
already have federal officials coming
out and making conclusions as though an
investigation has already been
conducted. You have Cash Patel and you
have Christine Gnome saying this guy was
a menace. He had a gun. He was
threatening agents. So while an
investigation is still pending, you
already have federal officials, much
like in the aftermath of Renee Good,
coming out and basically stating what
happened as if we know for certain.
>> Absolutely. And you know, usually
there's an appeal for calm and patience
in the wake of these kind of incidents
which are so traumatic for communities.
What we've seen in the case is the
opposite. We've seen federal officials
use really incendiary and jarring
language to describe the conduct of
people who have been observing,
documenting, and challenging the work of
immigration agents. They've
characterized some of these people as
domestic terrorists. And the Department
of Justice has launched an investigation
into the governor, Tim Walls, the mayor
of Minneapolis, Jacob Fry, the mayor of
St. Paul, who just got inaugurated a few
days ago, the attorney general, and the
top prosecutor in Minneapolis. And the
contention is that all these Democratic
elected officials have been speaking in
ways that the federal government deems
dangerous for their immigration
enforcement operation because they've
been resisting it and criticizing it and
challenging it. Is there any evidence
that local law enforcement is in fact
obstructing or interfering with federal
officials in their deportation efforts?
>> No. It's important to point out that the
city of Minneapolis and the city of St.
Paul, they have chosen not to cooperate
with civil immigration enforcement,
meaning police officers in these cities
do not ask residents about their
immigration status. However,
when it comes to people who are in jails
and prisons,
the state says that they cooperate
routinely in facilitating a seamless and
practical handover of individuals who
are subject to deportation who are about
to be released either from state prisons
because they've completed their sentence
or from jails. So local officials say
the sense that Minnesota is this kind of
radical
sanctuary state where people who are
here legally are essentially shielded by
the local government is blatantly false.
>> Can you walk us through how state
officials are responding? People like
Tim Waltz, Mayor Jacob Fry, Senator Amy
Clolobachar. What are they saying? And
and how has any of that rhetoric shifted
since the first shooting? They are suing
the administration trying to see if a
judge orders the administration to put
an end to the immigration crackdown. And
Saturday's shooting led Governor Walls
to deploy the National Guard because I
think he and people in his
administration feel that this city could
once again blow up the way we saw in the
wake of George Floyd's killing in 2020.
M so I want to talk about the broader
political response for a moment. Are
there other options that elected
officials both in Minnesota and beyond
are considering right now? Federal
lawmakers from Minnesota appear to be in
lock step thinking that maybe the only
way to shut this down or to use one of
the few levers of power they have over
the Trump administration is the threat
of withholding funding for the
Department of Homeland Security. The
question though, you know, considering
the fact that Republicans are in control
of both chambers and Capitol Hill, is
whether you could have enough
Republicans peel off and agree with
Democrats. And while I think we're
starting to see glimmers of Republicans
signaling discomfort, it's far from
clear whether you'd have enough votes
and enough opposition to really make a
difference. Polls in this country show
that most people are supportive of the
Trump administration's stated goals of
dealing with immigration by closing the
border, enforcing deportations of people
who are here illegally. But a majority
of Americans think that ICE has gone too
far in its tactics. And in recent weeks
since the killing of Renee Good, you
have started to see and hear people who
have traditionally been supportive of
the administration really question these
policies. You had Joe Rogan basically
compare ICE to the Gestapo. You had
Maria Berto Romo pushing Cash Patel on
television about what kind of threat
Alex Prey could have possibly posed
given the fact that he was holding a
camera and not a gun. And so while it's
incredibly hard to speculate of course
about what comes next, I do wonder if
the second killing feels like in any way
a tipping point to you right now. I
think the videos in this case are
singularly horrifying. I also think just
based on the kind of emails that have
been streaming into my inbox over the
past 24 hours that we remain a deeply
divided country on the question of
immigration and on the merits of a
really draconian response to the problem
of illegal immigration. There are people
for whom these actions are not justified
but welcome. There are many people who
have written to me to say these people
in Minneapolis who got gunned down had
it coming. They shouldn't have been
interfering with the work of immigration
agents and let this be a lesson to other
people who would want to challenge what
they're doing.
>> Right? I think one of the things that is
really interesting about the two
individuals whose lives were lost is on
some level they're like deeply
sympathetic figures. This woman was a
mother of three and a poet.
>> Mhm.
>> And the second victim was a nurse who
worked and took care of veterans. So, it
feels hard, I think, for the average
American to take this assertion that
these two people who were gunned down in
broad daylight fit the description of a
domestic terrorist.
[music]
So I think the key question is what
happens to the segment of the electorate
that is more moderate on these issues,
that is more persuadable, and for whom
these really searing images and videos
are going to [music] push them into the
camp of thinking this has gone too far
and that on some level the
administration needs to be reigned in.
Ernesto, thank you so much.
Thank you.
[music]
We'll be right back.
Here's
what else you need to know today. A
dangerous winter storm pummeled much
[music] of the eastern United States on
Sunday, shattering temperature records,
knocking out power to more than a
million homes and businesses, and
wreaking havoc on daily [music] life
from Mississippi to Massachusetts.
Five people were found dead in New York
City over the weekend, and officials
were investigating whether they died
because [music] of the cold. One person
died of exposure in Austin, Texas, while
the Louisiana Department of Health said
two men had died [music] of hypothermia.
And Representative Maxwell Alejandro
Frost, Democrat [music] of Florida, was
hit in the face by a man who told the
lawmaker that he [music] would be
deported at the Sundance Film Festival
in Park City, Utah over the weekend.
[music] The police said they responded
to reports of an assault at the High
West Saloon, a whiskey distillery and
bar where a private party was [music]
being held.
The attacker quote, "Told me that Trump
was going to deport me [music] before he
punched me in the face," said Mr. Frost,
whose family moved from Cuba to Florida
in the early 1960s in a [music] social
media post.
"Today's episode was produced by Diana
Wyn and Nina Feldman. It was edited by
Lizo Balin and Lisa Chow. [music]
Contains music by Pat McCusker, Rowan
Demy Misto, Dan Powell, and Diane Wong.
And was engineered [music] by Chris
Wood.
[music]
That's it for the Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.